STATE OF THE ECONOMY:
GETTING BACK INTO THE
FAST LANE
01
The global economy exhibited steady yet uneven growth across regions in 2024.
A notable trend was the slowdown in global manufacturing, especially in Europe
and parts of Asia, due to supply chain disruptions and weak external demand.
In contrast, the services sector performed better, supporting growth in many
economies. Inflationary pressures eased in most economies. However, services
inflation has remained persistent. Although commodity prices have stabilised,
the risk of synchronised price increases persists. With growth varying across
economies and last-mile disinflation proving sticky, central banks may chart
varying paths of monetary easing. This will lead to uncertainty over future
policy rates and inflation trajectories. This apart, geopolitical tensions, ongoing
conflicts, and trade policy risks continue to pose significant challenges to global
economic stability.
In this global context, India displayed steady economic growth. As per the
first advance estimates of national accounts, India’s real GDP is estimated to
grow by 6.4 per cent in FY25. Growth in the first half of FY25 was supported by
agriculture and services, with rural demand improving on the back of record
Kharif production and favourable agricultural conditions. The manufacturing
sector faced pressures due to weak global demand and domestic seasonal
conditions. Private consumption remained stable, reflecting steady domestic
demand. Fiscal discipline and strong external balance supported by a services
trade surplus and healthy remittance growth contributed to macroeconomic
stability. Together, these factors provided a solid foundation for sustained
growth amid external uncertainties.
Looking ahead, India’s economic prospects for FY26 are balanced. Headwinds
to growth include elevated geopolitical and trade uncertainties and possible
commodity price shocks. Domestically, the translation of order books of
private capital goods sector into sustained investment pick-up, improvements
in consumer confidence, and corporate wage pick-up will be key to promoting
growth. Rural demand backed by a rebound in agricultural production, an
anticipated easing of food inflation and a stable macro-economic environment
provide an upside to near-term growth. Overall, India will need to improve
its global competitiveness through grassroots-level structural reforms and
deregulation to reinforce its medium-term growth potential.

INTRODUCTION
1.1 Global economic conditions are shaped by changing growth dynamics, fluctuating
commodity prices, and evolving monetary policies, which influence domestic inflation,
trade balances, and capital flows. At present, this interconnectedness is complicated by
unusual levels of geopolitical tensions, supply chain disruptions, and climate-related
shocks. Against this background, this chapter is organised broadly into four sections.
The first section outlines the global economic scenario comprehensively, highlighting
growth and inflation trends, policy stances, and key emerging risks and uncertainties.
The second section focuses on the domestic macroeconomic situation, examining
developments from the demand and supply sides. The third section delves into the
emerging trends in public finances, inflation, external sector, financial markets and
employment. The concluding section presents the prospects and outlook for growth in
the presence of global headwinds while capitalising on domestic growth drivers.
GLOBAL ECONOMIC SCENARIO
Steady global growth and varied regional dynamics
1.2 Globally, 2024 has been an eventful year. The year witnessed unprecedented
electoral activity on the political front, with more than half of the global population
voting in major elections across countries. Meanwhile, adverse developments like the
Russia-Ukraine conflict and the Israel-Hamas conflict increased regional instability.
These events impacted energy and food security, leading to higher prices and rising
inflation. Cyberattacks also became more frequent and severe, with growing human
and financial consequences due to the increasing digitisation of critical infrastructure.1
Geopolitical tensions, have reshaped global trade. Geopolitical risks and policy
uncertainty, especially around trade policies, have also contributed to increased
volatility in global financial markets.2
